# Voice Assistants and Biometric Data
## Amazon’s Violations of Children's Privacy Rights

### Themes:

Data Security & Privacy

### Prerequisites:

-   None for the Case Study section

### Owner:

[<u>Center for AI and Data
Ethics</u>](https://www.usfca.edu/data-institute/centers-initiatives/caide)
at University of San Francisco

### Author(s):

Hadley Dixon and Robert Clements

### Links:

-   Github repository:
    [<u>https://github.com/caidecasestudies/case-study-voice-assistants</u>](https://github.com/caidecasestudies/case-study-voice-assistants)

-   PDF

### License:

Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International  
[<u>CC BY-NC-SA</u>](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/deed.en)

### Citation:

Dixon, Hadley and Clements, Robert. (2024).
[<u>https://github.com/caidecasestudies/case-study-voice-assistants</u>](https://github.com/caidecasestudies/case-study-voice-assistants).
Voice Assistants and Biometric Data: Amazon’s Violation of Children’s
Privacy Rights.

### DOI:

### Objective:

The purpose of this case study is to introduce issues around data
privacy and data security by learning the details about a specific
lawsuit brought against a popular tech company, and use the details and
results of that lawsuit to discuss the potential harms done by this
company and other similar companies and gaps in our current laws and
regulations around privacy.

### Instructions:

1.  Read through the case study individually and then answer the
    discussion questions as a group, or in small groups.

### Case Study:

In November 2014, Amazon released the first version of its
voice-activated digital assistant, Alexa, along with the Amazon Echo
device. Alexa’s capabilities have since expanded and has become a
prominent player in the digital assistant market alongside Apple’s Siri
and Google’s Home Assistant. These technologies offer a seamless and
hands-free way to interact with various devices and bring convenience to
daily tasks such as setting reminders, playing music, and browsing the
web. The natural language processing capabilities of these voice
assistants make them user-friendly and accessible to a broad audience,
making this technology essential to the smart-home ecosystem.

The rapid development of voice assistant technology in recent years
raises significant privacy concerns due to the inherent need to
transmit, store and process voice data for the proper functioning of
these devices. Voice data holds crucial information, including the tone,
word choice, and frequency of speech. Once stored, voice detection
models trained on this data can detect especially intimate details, such
as a user’s height, weight, ethnicity, personality traits, emotional
state, and demeanor ([<u>Winters,
2022</u>](https://abcnews.go.com/Technology/collection-voice-data-profit-raises-privacy-fears/story?id=96363792)).
The efficacy of voice assistant technology relies on the ability to
store biometric data. The subsequent privacy considerations should
address if this data should be stored, for how long, who is able to view
stored data and for what purpose. In the absence of limiting its
collection, protection of this data becomes crucial, especially
regarding safeguards for children.

On May 31st, 2023, the Department of Justice (DOJ) and the Federal Trade
Commission (FTC) filed a legal complaint, [<u>USA v. Amazon.com, Inc
(2023)</u>](https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/Amazon-Complaint-%28Dkt.1%29.pdf),
against Amazon for allegedly violating the Children’s Online Privacy
Protection Act (COPPA) Rule and for deceptive practices regarding data
deletion. The significance of this case extends beyond Amazon itself,
serving as a critical examination of AI privacy rights and the
responsibility of companies in safeguarding user data, particularly
biometric data ([<u>FTC,
2023a</u>](https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2023/05/ftc-doj-charge-amazon-violating-childrens-privacy-law-keeping-kids-alexa-voice-recordings-forever)).

Congress enacted the [<u>Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
(COPPA)</u> <u>of
1998</u>](https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/2012-31341.pdf) to protect
the safety and privacy of children online by prohibiting the
unauthorized or unnecessary collection of children’s personal
information by operators of online services. Provisions of COPPA require
that an operator of a commercial website or online service directed to
children under 13-years-old notify parents about the information they
collect from children, obtain parents’ consent for the collection of
that data, and allow them to delete that information at any time.
Additionally, the COPPA Rule prohibits the retention of information
collected from children under 13 for longer than “reasonably necessary”
to provide the service. In this context, personal information explicitly
refers to a child’s first and last name, an audio file of a child’s
voice, and parental information collected from a child’s online account.

According to the complaint Amazon’s virtual assistants include voice
activated services aimed at children under 13-years-old, specifically
“FreeTime Unlimited on Alexa” and the Echo Dot Kids smart speaker, which
offer children’s audiobooks, and audio-based Alexa applications such as
voice controlled games, stories, jokes, and educational tools ([<u>FTC,
2023c</u>](https://www.ftc.gov/business-guidance/blog/2023/05/out-mouths-babes-ftc-says-amazon-kept-kids-alexa-voice-data-forever-even-after-parents-ordered)).
More than 800,000 children under 13-years-old have their own Alexa
profiles, which include the child’s name, birthdate, gender, and a link
to the parent’s profile. The allegations state that Amazon violated data
retention policies for children as outlined in COPPA and deceived
parents and Alexa users about deletion practices. This follows several
instances of parents’ requests to delete their children’s voice data,
with Amazon responding by deleting files in some databases while
maintaining them in some form elsewhere – meaning the information was
available for Amazon to use for its own purposes. Also, important to
note is that the original data when initially stored was made available
to thousands of employees that had no need for accessing the data and
did not work on any Alexa-based teams. The complaint alleges that Amazon
prevents parents from exercising their deletion rights under the COPPA
rule and kept voice and geolocation data for years, violating the
duration of which it is “reasonably necessary” to provide the service.
By retaining this data indefinitely and using it to train their
algorithms, the plaintiffs claim Amazon has violated COPPA and put
children’s data at risk of harm from unnecessary access.

In response, Amazon claimed it retained children’s voice recordings in
order to better respond to commands, allow parents to review them, and
to improve Alexa’s speech recognition and processing capabilities. The
company claims the utility in retaining children’s voice data lies in
the differing speech patterns between children and adults, which
ultimately provide the company with valuable data when training their
voice detection models.

Following the complaint, the proposed court order imposes provisions on
Amazon, as well as levying a $25 million civil penalty. These provisions
prohibit Amazon from using geolocation, voice information, and
children’s voice information when subject to consumers’ deletion
requests and from misrepresenting its privacy policies related to the
biometrics of children. Additionally, Amazon is required to delete
inactive Alexa accounts of children and implement a privacy program
related to the company’s use of geolocation information, which was not
formerly in existence. All users must be notified about the complaint
filed by the FTC-DOJ, as well as Amazon’s updated data retention and
deletion practices.

### Discussion Questions:

1.  What goals and purposes were involved in the actions taken by the
    FTC-DOJ?

2.  Were the circumstances of Amazon’s violations created intentionally,
    unintentionally, or as a side effect of corporate incentives?

3.  How do Amazon’s actions put children at risk of harm? In what ways
    can biometric data be exploited in the hands of an unsanctioned
    third party?

4.  Should there be an equivalent to the COPPA rule for adults or
    certain sub-populations of adults?

This case is one of many against Amazon (<u>FTCb, 2023</u>). Users are
questioning, to what extent will companies sacrifice privacy for
profits? It is important to ensure to users that artificial intelligence
(AI) systems are designed with privacy in mind and that individuals
maintain ownership over their data.

To address these privacy concerns, it is crucial for companies to
implement robust data protection measures. This includes strict
adherence to existing regulations, such as COPPA. California, Texas,
Washington, and Illinois already have enacted laws pertaining to the
collection of voice data. One policy in Illinois requires companies to
obtain written consent from individuals before collecting such data, and
afterward are prohibited from selling or profiting off of the
information, facing financial penalties if violated. Furthermore, there
is a need for enhanced oversight and accountability mechanisms.
Settlements like the one proposed by the FTC send clear warnings to
companies developing AI about the consequences of neglecting user
privacy rights. Similarly, regular audits and assessments by regulatory
bodies can help ensure compliance, and companies should act proactively
to address user requests for data deletion. Proactive efforts become
increasingly important when considering interactions between voice
assistants and other devices in the home. Vulnerabilities compound when
voice data is linked with other sensitive information such as the home’s
floor plan from robot vacuums, or the use frequency of the home security
system. Implementing privacy-by-design principles in the development of
AI technologies can also contribute to minimizing the risks associated
with data collection and retention.

### References:

Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998, 15
U.S.C. § 6501 (1998).

Federal Trade Commission (FTC). (2023a, May). FTC and
DOJ charge Amazon with violating children’s privacy law \[Press
release\]. Retrieved from
[<u>https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2023/05/ftc-doj-charge-amazon-violating-childrens-privacy-law-keeping-kids-alexa-voice-recordings-forever</u>](https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2023/05/ftc-doj-charge-amazon-violating-childrens-privacy-law-keeping-kids-alexa-voice-recordings-forever)

Federal Trade Commission (FTC). (2023b, May). FTC
says Ring employees illegally surveilled customers, failed to stop
hackers from taking control of users' cameras \[Press release\].
Retrieved from
[<u>https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2023/05/ftc-says-ring-employees-illegally-surveilled-customers-failed-stop-hackers-taking-control-users</u>](https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2023/05/ftc-says-ring-employees-illegally-surveilled-customers-failed-stop-hackers-taking-control-users)

Federal Trade Commission (FTC). (2023c, May). Out of the mouths of
babes? FTC says Amazon kept kids’ Alexa voice data forever – even after
parents ordered deletion \[Blog post\]. Retrieved from
[<u>https://www.ftc.gov/business-guidance/blog/2023/05/out-mouths-babes-ftc-says-amazon-kept-kids-alexa-voice-data-forever-even-after-parents-ordered</u>](https://www.ftc.gov/business-guidance/blog/2023/05/out-mouths-babes-ftc-says-amazon-kept-kids-alexa-voice-data-forever-even-after-parents-ordered)

United States of America v. Amazon.com, Inc, Case No. 2:23-cv-00811
(United States District Court Western District of Washington 2023).
Complaint for Permanent Injunction, Civil Penalties, and Other Relief.
Retrieved from
[<u>https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc\_gov/pdf/Amazon-Complaint-%28Dkt.1%29.pdf</u>](https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/Amazon-Complaint-%28Dkt.1%29.pdf)

Winters, M. (2022, January 20). Collection of voice data for profit
raises privacy fears. ABC News. Retrieved from
[<u>https://abcnews.go.com/Technology/collection-voice-data-profit-raises-privacy-fears/story?id=96363792</u>](https://abcnews.go.com/Technology/collection-voice-data-profit-raises-privacy-fears/story?id=96363792)
